All right, so we've got our guessing game working a little better now, it's a little more convenient,
giving us proper feedback and letting us make multiple guesses without having to keep restarting the
program.
But now let's say that we wanted to be able to exit out of the guessing loop prematurely.
We just get tired of trying to make guesses forever, and we just want to stop somehow.
Wouldn't it be nice if maybe instead of entering a number two, guess we could enter something like
a queue to quit something like that?
Well, we can do that.
But one way to do it would be to test for some condition to determine whether or not this loop should
keep going.
And so currently, we don't test for any condition in the loop.
We just hardcoded it to true.
But we could change this similarly to whatever we would put in parentheses of an if block.
So let's make it so that we can quit out of the loop if we enter a queue, for example.
Now, if we want the application to behave in that way, we're going to need to make a change here.
So notice what happens here.
First thing we do when the program starts is we generate our random number and then we store that here
in the random, numb field.
Then we enter into our loop.
And then we take in, we prompt the user for input expecting generally a number, but first we get back
just a string, right?
Then we convert that string into a number.
Then we determine whether or not the entered number is matches, the guest number and so on and so forth.
OK, so here's the issue.
Ideally, what I think we might want to do is to take this keyboard input, but then tie whatever we
entered here into a test inside of this wire loop.
So that is to say something like.
While the guest num text isn't a cue, keep looping something something like that.
So let's see what that might look like if we were to do that while the guest num text isn't a cue.
So first off, how can we compare this text to the letter Q, can you think of how to do that and do
it in between these parentheses?
OK, so one way we could do that would be to say.
Guest num text that equals because now we're comparing text, not just numbers, right, we're comparing
text equals.
Hugh -- Q.
Now we've got a few problems here.
I'll begin with the fact that we've got this red mark here, and if we hover the text here, it says
it cannot resolve symbol, guest name, text.
Now the problem here is that we're referring to a variable that has not yet been defined or declared.
It is declared on the very next line, but in order to use it on Line seven, it has to be declared
above line seven.
So that's one issue.
So one way we can resolve that is to declare this variable before we get to line seven.
So what I'm going to do here is I'm going to copy this declaration.
I'm going to command C copy that and then I'm going to make a new line right after Line six and paste
this here.
Like so?
Now I need to do something with this variable.
So one thing I maybe could do is just set it to null for right now.
OK.
All right, now, I've got another problem now that I'm declaring the variable here on Line seven.
The Java is not going to like the fact that I'm redefining it again on Line nine.
So, you know, I'm basically trying to redefine it, essentially.
So one easy fix for that could be simply to remove the word string here.
And now I'm simply referring to a variable that already was declared.
So in other words, on Line seven, I'm telling Java that I want to have a variable called string,
and right now I'm just going to set it to null.
Then on Line nine, I'm saying now I want you to set that string to this value, OK, so I can reassign
another value to this variable as long as I'm not declaring it from scratch right up here, I'm declaring
it and I'm assigning null to it down here.
I'm just assigning another value to that variable that's perfectly OK to do.
All right, now, there's another problem here.
And it's a little bit of a subtle one that I did mention, but you may or may not remember it online.
Eight.
I'm saying while the guest num text equals Q.
Then do this loop.
Now there's a problem, though.
The problem is that the first time this program runs guest none text is null and you can't call a method
on a null object.
Do you remember I mentioned that, but I also mentioned a way to safeguard against this kind of problem.
Do you remember what that was?
I'll give you a moment.
OK?
What I suggested was that to safeguard against the possibility of a method whose object is null, which
would result in an exception being thrown, you can actually, in this case, we can actually just flip
these arguments around so we can put the Q first Q dot equals.
Just text like so and then we'll just get rid of the rest of this.
OK, so now if the guest num text is null, it won't matter because the method that we're calling isn't
a method of the guest num text.
It's a it's a method of this string literal here.
Q And that's always going to exist.
OK.
And so if this variable happens to be null, there's no problem.
And it still means the same thing if the guest num text equals Q, it's just we're writing it a little
backward now.
OK, so let's rebuild this with a command, F9.
And then let's rerun our program and see what we get now.
All right.
Now there's one more thing we need to do.
Our logic is actually not quite right.
We're saying if guest none text equals Q, then do all of this.
That's not actually the logic we want.
We actually want the opposite of this logic we want.
If guest num text is not Q, then execute what's in this loop.
That's what we want.
So now we want to kind of flip this logic.
So keep in mind that the equals method returns a Boolean that is a true or a false.
So we want to flip the results of this Boolean.
How can we do that?
Well, I haven't directly shown you how to do it in this particular case, but we have seen something
kind of like it before.
If you'll recall, when we learned about Julian's, I did something like my flag equals true, right?
But then I did show you that if you wanted to negate a Boolean, you could just put an exclamation mark
in front of it.
And then that flips the bit, so to speak, right?
That flips the value from whatever it currently is to the opposite of that.
And so we can do this here as well by simply putting an exclamation mark in front of the rest of this
expression here.
And so that will flip it.
And the way you can read this is to say, while Q is not equal to guest num text, then do all of this
or put another way you could say while the guest num text is not Q, that's basically what what we're
saying here.
Now I know that may look a little confusing, but it's actually really simple, right?
We're simply saying as long as the guest no text isn't Q, then do all of this.
All right, so now let's build our project.
And then we can run it.
All right, so now we're getting prompted.
So let's take a few guesses here.
I'm going to guess a four.
I didn't get it.
I'm going to guess a six.
Hey, I got it.
All right.
So that wasn't a good one.
Let's try another one.
Because I want a chance to quit out of the program, right?
All right.
Yes, a number between one and 10.
I'm going to guess a two.
All right.
There's some I'm going to guess a negative for because I know that won't be in it and a negative two
and a negative six and a negative nine.
OK, so let's say I get tired of doing this and I just want to stop now and I don't want to kill the
program.
I want to quit so night type Q and then I hit return.
So now is the moment of truth.
Let's see what happens.
OK, so now what happens is we get a no format exception, and I'm looking at this what's called a stack
trace here.
This just tells us that something went wrong in our program.
Now the way to read this is you generally want to start off by looking at lines of code that are in
the code that you wrote.
So this first line here is is the no format exception at Line 67.
So that's not something that we wrote integer that Java, that's not something we wrote.
None of these are something we wrote until we get down to this last line.
Yes, it Java.
Guess it is our class and the line that we care about is Line 10, which is right here.
So the problem is we are trying to pass the guest no text into an integer, but we entered a queue.
So obviously it's nonsensical to try to convert a queue into an integer.
And so the pass and method kind of blew up on us, right?
So now we need to handle that now.
Before we go any further, let me just explain a couple of things.
The road that we're about to go down is probably not a road that I would prefer to do, but I'm going
to go down this road a little bit with you because I want to show you some ways that we can use this
while loop.
And this is just the natural progression that we're going down in.
Sometimes when you're coding, you'll start to go down a particular road and it may take you a little
bit of time before you realize maybe you don't want to be going down that road.
But that is what real programming sometimes becomes.
And so I'm going to try my best not to confuse you with a lot of convoluted code, but at the same time,
I want you to have an opportunity to see what real programming sometimes can look like.
OK.
So we'll try to be a little bit careful here.
So the problem is now we can't do this passent business anymore when we enter a queue.
So we need to figure out how do we protect ourselves from the situation in which we've entered a non
numeric value and therefore we can't execute Line 10 right without blowing up the program.
So one thought that comes to my mind is we could test and make sure that whatever was entered here is
actually digits and only if it's digits, we will execute the rest of this.
Otherwise, we will skip over it.
Now I can think of a couple of ways to do that.
One way I can think of testing that this is a digit is to use a regular expression, which we now know
how to do right.
So let's see what that might look like.
So we want to say, like if this is digits, then allow all of this to execute, right?
That's what we want to say.
So a couple of thoughts I have are that we could wrap all of this code that we want to allow to execute
if you enter digits.
We could wrap all of this in an if block, right?
So I've selected it already.
So if I do a command option T.
I can say that I want to surround the selected text with an Earth block, by the way.
You don't have to use the command option T to surround with.
You could just, you know, type it all out by hand, but that's kind of clunky, clunky.
And so it's just easier as a lazy person to just do a command option T and then choose if it's right.
So bam, now that just surrounded every all of that code with an f block and put it all inside of one
block here and now it's waiting for me to tell it.
Well, if what?
So maybe let's let's see what this could look like.
Maybe we could say something like if guest num text matches remember this the matches method, and then
we can give it a rejects.
If it matches, let's say so, digits is to back slashes and a D.
So that means one digit.
Now we could have up to one one through 10, right?
So we want to allow for up to two digits, right?
Up to two digits, so technically to say up to two digits, we use a curly brace.
So up to two digits that would be one or two digits, so two to say that in regex we can say one comma
two, right, so between one and two digits.
So this is saying if what we entered is a number between one and two digits long, then go ahead and
execute the rest of this.
Otherwise it's going to just not do any of that at all.
And then the loop will just continue.
OK, now I will admit this is a little more complex than I might like it to be.
There may be better ways to do this.
I don't want to spend a whole lot of time thinking about all the possibilities right at this moment,
though, but I just want to point out a couple of things here.
Any time you've got nested, if statements like we have here, you are increasing the complexity of
the code.
So those are things to be careful about and to look out for.
You don't want to have three, four, five, six and more levels of nested if statements here and for
that matter, even having these nested if statements inside of a while loop, all of that is starting
to increase the complexity of the program.
OK, so you just want to be kind of mindful of that.
I definitely would not really like to go much more than this.
And honestly, if I were doing this professionally, I might first want to just get the program working,
maybe.
But I'd probably want to circle back around and look and try to determine, is there a better way to
do this where I could get rid of some of this nesting?
I'm not a big fan of it.
It makes the code more complicated than you'd like it to be to to process in your own head.
All right.
But anyway, let's see if this gets us over our little issue here.
So let's rebuild the program with a command F9.
OK.
And then we can run it.
All right.
So please get the number between one and 10 inclusively.
Now the way we did this before was that we actually entered a bunch of negative numbers.
Let's see what happens if we enter a negative number now, especially with that regular expression negative
five.
OK, so now what just happened is we entered a negative five and then we didn't get either of these
outputs here.
That's probably not the behavior that we actually want.
We want to allow that.
If you entered a negative five, that would be OK.
So I think we need to adjust our regular expression to allow for the possibility of a negative, followed
by some digits.
Right.
So let's do a control C to stop our program.
And can you think of how we can allow for an optional negative symbol to be allowed in this rig x?
Take a moment and think about that.
OK, so if we want to allow for a negative in here, optionally what we could say is we want to allow
for the possibility of zero or one negative sign, right?
So zero or one can be done this way.
So we'll say we want to allow for a negative sign, literally.
And then zero or one is a question mark just like that.
So zero or one or zero or one hyphens or negative signs followed by one or two digits?
All right.
So let's build that.
And then let's try running it again.
All right, so now I'm going to do negative for OK, that that seems like it's working now.
It allowed that and I got a you didn't get it.
All right.
So I will do a negative three and obviously none of my negative guesses are going to work.
I'm doing them on purpose so that I get a chance to test out at the looping code is working right and
I'll do one more negative case here.
I'm going to do a negative 10 to make sure that my X is allowing me to enter up to two digits.
OK.
Very good.
And now let's test the queue for quitting out of the loop and see what happens there.
So enter queue.
Hey, looks like that worked that killed the program?
Right?
All right.
So this is at least that part is all working correctly.
Now I'm going to run it one more time and try to actually win.
All right, so I'm going to guess a five, nope, I didn't get it a three.
Nope.
A one two.
Oops for.
Hey, I got it, it was for.
Cool.
OK.
All right, so let's recap what we've done now.
So we removed the hard coating on this while loop here, the hard coated true we used to have it, you
know, we started off like that, right?
So that was just going to make that loop just continue to go forever.
Essentially, we replaced that with this logic that says keep looping as long as or while the guest
numb text is not is not equal to Q.
And I know it's, you know, you read it kind of out of order, right?
Guess num text is not equal to Q, but that's just how you know the coating works.
All right.
So and then keep in mind that we flipped the order of these two bits here.
Initially, we were doing just num text that equals Q, but that doesn't work well if you initialize
the variable to null, right?
Because you can't call a method on a null object.
So to protect ourselves from the program blowing up, if you called it called a method like equals on
a null object to protect ourselves from that.
We flipped the parts around and we we call equals on the Q object instead, which will always exist,
right?
Because it's hard coded.
Then we got to blow up when we tried to pass the Q.
If you enter to Q, if the program was blowing up when we tried to convert the Q into a number, because
that doesn't make any sense, right?
And so then we had to protect ourselves from being able to execute this line in particular if we did
enter a Q.
And so we ended up just protecting all of this code inside of an f block to say only run all of this
code if the text that you entered matches this regular expression.
And now we get a really nice chance to see a somewhat realistic scenario where we might want to use
a regex.
In this case, we are validating that what we're entering is actually numbers, right?
And so that's a that's a pretty decent little use of a red x there.
OK.
So we're going to wrap up this lesson and we will continue with this program, though, and we will
learn a variation on the while loop and I will see you in the next one.